20th May 2011
=============

Progress
--------

* UEG code has been started.  An FCI implementation is nearing completion.
* A variety of theoretical and algorithmic work---see discussion.

Discussion
----------

* James realised that when choosing the four wavevectors involved in an excitation in the UEG, not only is the fourth wavevector uniquely defined by the first three in order to conserve crystal momentum, but also the number of possible values for the third wavevector is restricted by the choice of the first two.  This is due to the fourth wavevector must actually belong to the basis set.  If the basis set is defined to be formed from the set of all wavevectors with magnitude less than or equal to :math:`K` (i.e. a kinetic energy cutoff is applied), then for an excitation :math:`({\bf k}_i,{\bf k}_j)\rightarrow({\bf k}_a,{\bf k}_b)`, the number of possible values for :math:`{\bf k}_a` is given by the volume of intersection between two spheres of radius :math:`K`, one centred on the origin and one at :math:`|{\bf k}_i+{\bf k}_j|`, divided by the volume occupied by one wavevector.  It is not worth the computational cost to renormalise the generation probabilities for the UEG (as we do for the Hubbard model) to take into account the possibility that the fourth spin-orbital is occupied, as the size of the basis is so much larger than the number of electrons (unlike in the Hubbard model).
* Matthew has substantially extended the continuous time notes to place the model rates work on a mathematical footing.  We discussed the current restriction that the model rate must be larger or equal to the actual rate.  It is not clear whether/how this can be overcome.
* We discussed a reading list for the MSci students.  They should be looking to read c.100 pages in detail over the summer.  The list might also be of interest to Will Handley (UROP student).  Whilst the most approachable notes are written by us, they must be able to have material which they can cite.
    #. Hartree--Fock and Density Functional Theory (optional)
        * Matthew's CDT lecture notes.
        * Ch. 1 (and Ch. 3?), Szabo and Ostlund.
        * Parr and Yang (optional).
    #. Second quantisation
        * Matthew's notes.
        * Ch. 1 Negele and Orland.
        * Bruus and Flensberg.
    #. Quantum Chemistry
        * Ab Initio Methods for Electron Correlation in Molecules by Knowles et al.  This is quite a long review article and not all sections are relevant.
    #. Quantum Monte Carlo
        * Kalos and Whitlock.
        * Matthew's review article in RMP.
        * Matthew's unfinished review article.
    #. FCIQMC
        * Alavi group papers (FCIQMC, i-FCIQMC, electron affinities).
        * Our notes (in hubbard_fciqmc repository).

Todo
----

* Run separate strings tests in 1D and 2D.
* Continuous time optimisation.
* UEG FCI and FCIQMC implementation (timestep algorithm initially).
* Mendeley group for MSci reading list.
